---
layout: page-fullwidth
subheadline:
title:  "Political System"
meta_title: "BKR - Political System"
topic: "BKR"
teaser: ""
breadcrumb: true

categories:
    - politics
tags:
    - blog
    - content
    - post
    - post format

---
>
Knowledge will forever govern ignorance; and a people who mean to be their own governors must arm themselves with the power which knowledge gives.
<br/>- James Madison
{: .text-left }

<div class="row">
<div class="medium-4 medium-push-8 columns" markdown="1">
<div class="panel radius" markdown="1">
**Table of Contents**
{: #toc }
*  TOC
{:toc}
</div>
</div><!-- /.medium-4.columns -->

<div class="medium-8 medium-pull-4 columns" markdown="1">

## Overview {#overview}

The government of the Bahamas consists of three majors parts:
<li> The Queen (represented by the Governor-General)</li>
<li> An elected House of Assembly (lower house / chamber)</li>
<li> An appointed Senate (upper house / chamber)</li>

### The Queen of the Bahamas

The formal head of the Bahamian government is a woman, Queen Elizabeth II. She appoints a viceregal representative called the Governor-General to carry out her constitutional duties in her absence. 

<h5>Powers and Responsibilities</h5>

In conjunction with the Prime Minister (the leader of the major ruling party), the Governor-General appoints government Ministers ( The role of the Governor-General is not well understood or documented outside of the constitution. 

Term Limits: The Governor-General typically ends their term within five years but have no term limits.

<small markdown="1">[Up to table of contents](#toc)</small>
{: .text-right }

### The House of Assembly

The House of Assembly (HoA) consists of 38 'Members of Parliament' (MPs) who are elected from individual constituencies (neighborhoods). Jump down to the voting section by clicking here to learn more about that process. These 38 MPs are the only elected government positions.

These results implicity decide two other positions:
1. The Prime Minister - the controlling head of the Bahamian government
2. The Leader of the Opposition

While affliation with a political party is not necessary to run for a MP position, the two named positions require it. 

The office of Prime Minister is held by the leader of the party which wins a majority of House of Assembly positions (also known as seats). 

Similarly, the Leader of the Opposition is the leader of the party which wins the second highest seat count.

<h5>Eligibility</h5>

The constitution stipulates two requirements for holding a membership position in the House of Assembly:
<br/>1. being a citizen of the Bahamas who is 21 years or older
<br/>2. residing in the Bahamas for at least one year immediately before the date of nomination for election

<h5>Powers and Responsibilities</h5>

The HoA performs all major legislative functions.

Term Limits: 5 years

Some MPs are also selected as Ministers of one of 19 areas such as education, finance, and foreign affairs. Jump down to that section by clicking here.

<small markdown="1">[Up to table of contents](#toc)</small>
{: .text-right }

### Senate

The Senate consists of 16 members called Senators. These Senators are not elected, rather, they are appointed by the Governor-General after consultation with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. To decide on the Senator positions the Governor-General consults:
* the Prime Minister alone to appoint 9 of these Senators;
* the Leader of the Opposition alone to appoint 4;
* both the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Oppositions to appoint the remaining 3. 

The Senate has a leadership position called the President of the Senate.

The Senate is meant to operate as a checks-and-balance much like the US system.

<h5>Eligibility</h5>

The constitution stipulates two requirements for being appointed as a Senator:
<br/>1. being a citizen of the Bahamas who is 30 years or older
<br/>2. residing in the Bahamas for at least one year immediately before the date of appointment

<h5>Powers and Responsibilities</h5> 

The Senate can pass bills and make bill amendments which must be approved by the House of Assembly. The Senate may reject a bill that has passed the HoA. However, if the House passes the bill in two successive sessions, after Senate refusal, the HoA may send the bill directly to the Governor-General without the Senate's consent.

Term Limits: 5 years

<small markdown="1">[Up to table of contents](#toc)</small>
{: .text-right }

## Ministries {#ministries}

There are 17 distinct areas of government interest that are led by an individual. To find more information on the government ministries, departments, corporations, and statutory agencies - <a href="http://bit.ly/2ghJ8V0">click here</a> 

1. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h36BYv">Agriculture, Marine Resources and Local Government</a>
2. <a href="http://bit.ly/1Tsw8si">Education, Science and Technology</a> - <a href="http://www.ministryofeducationbahamas.com/">Dedicated website</a>
3. <a href="http://bit.ly/2heIaq6">Environment and Housing</a>
4. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h08Mfj">Finance</a>
5. <a href="http://bit.ly/2heDbtx">Financial Services</a>
6. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h36T1v">Foreign Affairs and Immigration</a>
7. <a href="http://bit.ly/2gPhAa3">Grand Bahama</a>
8. <a href="http://bit.ly/2heKtt3">Health</a>
9. <a href="http://bit.ly/2heL1TN">Labour and National Insurance</a>
10. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h47DpH">National Security</a>
11. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h41xpc">Office of the Attorney General & Ministry of Legal Affairs</a>
12. <a href="http://bit.ly/2heBlcf">Public Service</a>
13. <a href="http://bit.ly/2heG1uF">Social Services and Community Development</a>
14. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h49kU5">Tourism</a>
15. <a href="http://bit.ly/2ghT5lf">Transport and Aviation</a>
16. <a href="http://bit.ly/2h0ey0m">Works and Urban Development</a>
17. <a href="http://bit.ly/2gA95fU">Youth, Sports and Culture</a>

<small markdown="1">[Up to table of contents](#toc)</small>
{: .text-right }

## Voting {#voting}

The only elected positions in the Bahamian government are the 38 Members of Parliament.

The 38 MPs correspond to 38 individual constituencies (neighborhoods) in which an MP must have resided for a certain period of time in order to be eligible to run in that area. Similarly, citizens may only vote on the set of individuals running in the constituency in which they have resided for a certain period of time. This leads to MPs restricting their campaigning efforts to the constituency in which they are running. 

"...The current legal framework does not grant the electoral management body supervision of campaign finance, nor does it delegate this function to other public entities. In fact, political campaigns are fully funded from private sources. Campaign financing is currently unregulated and political parties are not required to report on the flows or administration of their campaign funds." <a href="http://www.vision2040bahamas.org/media/uploads/State_of_the_Nation_Summary_Report.pdf">State of the Nation Report, page 32</a> This has led to serious allegations of corruption in the past. Campaign financing can decide elections and reveal conflicts of interest.

An individual does not need to be affliated with a political party in order to run. However, because the Prime Minister is not elected and rather is the party leader of the winner of most MP seats, many citizens see voting for an independent candidate as an inability to directly affect who becomes Prime Minister. 

The citzens' inability to directly vote for the Prime Minister is one of the primary reasons for the extreme degree of 'party politics' seen in the Bahamas. Unlike in the US where political parties are split on social and economical issues, political parties in the Bahamas are primarily differentiated by individuals and the party leader. Subsequently, many citizens vote for individuals running with a particular party because they approve of the party leader rather than the individual themselves.

<h5>Eligibility</h5>

To vote you must:
<br/>1. be a citizen of the Bahamas who is 18 years or older
<br/>2. residing in the Bahamas for at least one year immediately before the date of appointment

<small markdown="1">[Up to table of contents](#toc)</small>
{: .text-right }

## Constituencies {#constituencies}

There are 38 constituencies, 24 on Nassau and 14 on the family islands.

|Nassau                           | Nassau                          | Family Island                         |
| :-----------------------------: | :-----------------------------: |:-------------------------------------:|
| 1. Bain Town & Grants Town      | 13. Marathon                    | 1. Cat Island, Rum Cay & San Salvador |
| 2. Bamboo Town                  | 14. Montagu                     | 2. Central & South Abaco              |
| 3. Carmichael                   | 15. Mount Moriah                | 3. Central & South Eleuthera          |
| 4. Centerville                  | 16. Nassau Village              | 4. Central Grand Bahama               |
| 5. Elizabeth                    | 17. Pineridge                   | 5. East Grand Bahama                  |
| 6. Englerston                   | 18. Pinewood                    | 6. Exumas and Ragged Island           |
| 7. Fort Charlotte               | 29. Seabreeze                   | 7. Long Island 						|
| 8. Fox Hill                     | 20. South Beach                 | 8. Mangrove Cay & South Andros        |
| 9. Garden Hills                 | 21. Southern Shores             | 9. Marco City 		                |
| 10. Golden Gates                | 22. St. Anne's                  | 10. M.I.C.A.L.* 					    |
| 11. Golden Isles                | 23. Tall Pines                  | 11. North Abaco                		|
| 12. Killarney                   | 24. Yamacraw                    | 12. North Andros & Berry Islands	    |
|                                 |              					| 13. North Eleuthera           		|
|                                 |              					| 14. West Grand Bahama & Bimini		|


* Mayaguana, Inagua (Great & Little), Crooked Island, Acklins, and Long Cay

<small markdown="1">[Up to table of contents](#toc)</small>
{: .text-right }

</div><!-- /.medium-8.columns -->
</div><!-- /.row -->